A VERY SHORT HISTORY OF DATA SCIENCE 

The story of data science began when statistics and computer science were integrated helping to sort huge amount of data. However, hustle of sorting and analyzing data for making it easy to use has taken the best of scientists, statisticians, librarians and others for years. In 1974 a survey was conducted on concepts of data that included facts and ideas. Furthermore, in 1977 statistics, modern computers and knowledge of domain experts were integrated to convert the data into information and knowledge. 

The year 1989 was the year when first knowledge discovery in databases was organized and after six years it became an annual event. Companies started predicting the product a person wants to buy by collecting his previous data. Whereas, in 1996 Data Science was included in a conference for the first time. In the following year statisticians were re-designated to data scientists. Issues were faced in the same field and special data mining tools were developed to resolve the issues.

Data science is a plan that requires drastic change, however this change requires innovation. Algorithm method has developed more rapidly as it can used easily on large complex data. In April 2002 a data science journal was launched describing data systems, legal issues, further another journal was launched which focused on the applications of statistical methods and provided a amenable environment to exchange ideas. To boost up the race, a competition was introduced based on extensive use of analytics, data back in 2005. It was concluded that Data scientists are researchers and it would be most important skill in the next decade. In june 2009 a data scientist group was created on LinkedIn so that it could be recognized by the whole world.

Data science is blended with modeling, hacking, statistics, machine learning. Many companies started hiring data scientist and hosting conferences in 2011, studies shows that to understand it better and to get everything in line we need to follow rules. Job growths grew like skyrocket over a decade.
