The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Lead Pencil Manufactory of A. W. Faber
at Stein near Nürnberg, Bavaria, by A. W. Faber

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Lead Pencil Manufactory of A. W. Faber at Stein near Nürnberg, Bavaria

Author: A. W. Faber

Release Date: June 7, 2016 [EBook #52256]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LEAD PENCIL MANUFACTORY ***




Produced by deaurider, Carolyn Jablonski and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









                                  THE

                        LEAD PENCIL MANUFACTORY

                                   OF

                             _A. W. FABER_

                                   AT

                          STEIN NEAR NÜRNBERG.

                                BAVARIA.




                         An historical sketch,

               in commemoration of the Jubilee celebrated
               in the year 1861 to mark the completion of
               the first Century of the existence of the
               Establishment, dedicated by the Proprietor
               to his Patrons and Business friends.

                               MOSS & CO.
                  FABER’S AGENTS FOR SIBERIAN PENCILS,
                        No. 432 Chestnut Street,
                             PHILADELPHIA.




                            DESCRIPTIVE LIST

                                   OF

                     FABER’S SIBERIAN LEAD PENCILS,
                     (See page 20 to 23 inclusive.)

                          _ESPECIALLY ADAPTED_

        FOR ENGINEERS, ARCHITECTS, ARTISTS, WOOD ENGRAVERS, AND
                              OFFICE USE.

       Extra Soft and Extra Black, marked B B B B B B
       Very Soft and Very Black,     “    B B B
       Soft and Very Black,          “    B B         or  No. 1.
       Soft and Black,               “    B           “   No. 2.
       Hard and Black,               “    H B         “   No. 3.
       Middling,                     “    F           “   No. 4.
       Hard,                         “    H           “   No. 5.
       Harder,                       “    H H
       Very Hard,                    “    H H H
       Extra Hard,                   “    H H H H H H


 On cards, 10 pencils, one of each above grades.

 In boxes,  7  do.  do.  do.           B B B, B B,  B,  H B, F, H,  H H.
 Do.        5  do.  do.  do.           B B,   B,   H B,   F,    H.
 Do.        5 (WITH KNIFE AND RUBBER.) do.    do.  do.   do.    do.


Artists’ Patent Pencils with moveable leads of all the grades.

Moveable leads, same quality, in boxes, containing six leads of any
grade.




                               MOSS & CO.

         Dealers in Drawing Instruments, Papers, Tracing Cloth,
                           Tracing Paper, &c.
                        No. 432 CHESTNUT STREET,
                             PHILADELPHIA.




------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration:

  J. L. Faber
  geb. 12 Juni 1817.]




                                  THE

                        LEAD PENCIL MANUFACTORY

                                   OF

                             _A. W. FABER_

                                   AT

                          STEIN NEAR NÜRNBERG.

                                BAVARIA.


                         An historical sketch,

               in commemoration of the Jubilee celebrated
               in the year 1861 to mark the completion of
               the first Century of the existence of the
               Establishment, dedicated by the Proprietor
               to his Patrons and Business friends.

                   Nürnberg. Printed by U. E. Sebald.




The lead pencil, as everyone knows, is an invention of modern times, and
may unhesitatingly be placed side by side with the numerous improvements
and inventions, by means of which the last three centuries in particular
have so largely contributed towards the spread of Arts and Sciences and
the facilitation of Study and Communication. To the classic ages and
their art the pencil and in general every application of lead as a
writing material was entirely unknown and it was first in the middle
ages, as we hear, that lead was employed for this purpose. This metal
however was by no means the same sort of thing as the black lead of our
pencils, which are indeed only mentioned in conjunction of lead on
account of the writing produced by them bearing some resemblance to
lead. Besides which lead was then only used for ruling lines and in no
instance for writing or drawing purposes. This leadruler was in form a
sharpedged disc, such as is said to have been used for the same purpose
even in the later periods of the classic ages.

With the developement and growth of modern painting the traces of
pencil-like drawings first begin to manifest themselves. The masters of
the fourteenth century, especially _van Eyck_, and of the fifteenth,
such as _Memlink_ and others, appear to be the first who mention works
of art executed with a pencil-like instrument upon chalked paper. They
are generally designated as drawings in silver-style, this specification
however not being capable of any closer confirmation, though this much
is certain that the use of pure silver is not intended to be implied. In
like manner it is reported of the Italian artists of the latter part of
the middle ages, that they drew with a silver-style upon smooth deal
covered with the dust of calcined bones, which process appears however
only to have met with very partial success.

On the other hand in Italy in the fourteenth century much drawing was
done with styles composed of a mixture of lead and tin; drawings that
could be effaced with bread crumb.

_Petrarch’s_ Laura was delineated by a contemporary in this manner and
in the time of _Michael Angelo_ the process was still in use. These
styles were then introduced into Germany from Italy, under what
particular name, we know not. In Italy they are called “_Stile_”, but
even they never seem at any time to have been the universally
acknowledged drawing material.

About the same period the pen came into use as a drawing- as well as
writing-material, to which were added, in the most flourishing days of
painting, black chalk and red chalk which enjoyed extensive use. The
Italians obtained the best red chalk from Germany and the best black
chalk from Spain. _Vasari_, speaking of an artist of the sixteenth
century, especially remarks that he understood how to use style, pen,
black chalk and red chalk with equal dexterity.

To this period belongs also the discovery of black lead and with it the
production of an entirely new writing- and drawing-material—_The Lead
Pencil_.

This invention, which conferred so many benefits not only upon practical
life but also upon art, was made in England in the reign of Queen
Elisabeth, for in the year 1564 the celebrated blacklead mines of
Borrowdale in Cumberland were discovered. With the opening of this mine
every element was present to render the developement of an extensive
pencil trade upon English soil possible.

In the year 1565 the _first_ lead pencils were manufactured in England.
The mines of Borrowdale, at one time on account of the valuable nature
of their produce exposed even to the predatory attacks of the
inhabitants of the neighbouring mountains, supply the English down to
the present day with the material for the best English leadpencils. The
manufacturing of the lead obtained was simple, the material, as soon as
it came out of the mine, being cut to the proper size with a saw and
then without any further manipulation fastened into the wood and it is
remarkable, that the first pencils made in this manner are acknowledged
to be decidedly the best and down to the present day unsurpassed by any
other manufacture in the softness and delicacy of the lead. Although the
Cumberland pencils were soon in great request as being the first to
really meet an exigency long felt, it is their excellent quality that
has given them their lasting and universal reputation especially in the
World of Art.

The Cumberland mine only remained open for six weeks in the year and yet
the blacklead obtained in this short time is stated to have been of the
value of £ 40,000 or One Million Francs each time.

The raw material was sent up to London just as it came from the mine and
there sold by auction in the _black lead market_, these sales taking
place on the first Monday in every month. The price averaged 36-40
shillings per English pound and the value of the good Cumberland black
lead according to Dufrénoy was 400 Francs per Kilogramme.

The fact of the English Government having considered it expedient
rigorously to prohibit the export of black lead in any other form than
that of leadpencils goes to prove of what importance these mines and the
manufacture of leadpencils in connexion with them was to England. In
spite of the fact however that the mines only remained open for six
weeks in the year and that no blacklead might be exported from them, the
working of the mines, continued as it was for upwards of a century, at
last began to have the effect of diminishing the yield, until at last
nothing was to be obtained from them but an inferior and impure material
no longer adapted as before for the manufacture of pencils.

In order to protect themselves from the consequences of a failure of the
Cumberland blacklead mines, the English strenuously sought in every
direction for new blacklead deposits, but down to the present day
without the desired success. There remained therefore nothing but to
look about for some means whereby the impure refuse still obtainable
could be purified.

The process invented for this purpose consisted of first grinding the
blacklead to powder as soon as it came out of the mine, then purifying
it as much as possible from foreign substances by chemical means and
finally compressing it by means of a press in such a manner that the
mass could be just as easily cut as the pure Cumberland blacklead used
to be. However notwithstanding all the appliances of art and science
were brought to bear upon the subject and spite of every exertion to
render this composition perfect, the English have not hitherto succeeded
in producing any material capable of replacing the natural blacklead as
obtained from the Cumberland mines.

These circumstances operated as an inducement to search for a
substitute, which would admit of a greater economy in the use of
blacklead. Experiments were made in England with this view and various
substances such as glue, isinglass, tragacanth, gum &c. were tried for
the purpose of cementing and consolidating the earthy blacklead into a
firm mass. But none of these means succeeded. Subsequently it was
attempted to improve the blacklead by melting it with minerals,
compounding it with 30 or 40 per cent of sulphur. But this made the
blacklead too brittle and the pencils made by this process would hardly
mark at all. At last mixing with antimony was tried, which certainly
yielded a composition in outward appearance very similar to the pure
blacklead, but which proved to be but an unsatisfactory writingmaterial.

Towards the end of last century the manufacture of leadpencils was
introduced into _France_ and soon attained to an extensive developement.
Hardly were the last restrictions upon industrial freedom removed in
that country, when in the year 1795 the idea was started of making use
of clay for the purpose of binding the blacklead together. This process
soon found favor on account of its many advantages for by this
commixture a great portion of the costly blacklead was saved and at the
same time the manufacture rendered materially easier, so that the
leadpencils could be supplied at a very much cheaper rate.

By these novel improvements a fresh era in the manufacture of
leadpencils was commenced in France. Notwithstanding this however, there
was yet very much to be done in the department of blackleadpencil
manufacture in order to keep pace with the increased requirements of
advancing art and more civilised life.

True, various degrees of hardness and different sorts of pencils were
thus obtained but these were by no means proportional to the various
modes of use. The manipulation of the brittle material demanded deep
study, and conscientious laborers in order to give the pencil the
requisite perfection.

If we now turn to _Germany_, it will in the first place be necessary to
cast a glance at the developement of German industry and German
leadpencil manufacture, it being then shown under what circumstances it
had to develope itself and with what rivals it had to enter into
competition.

It is not to be denied that from the very first German industry found
itself in a more disadvantageous position. France and England had
already become intrinsically industrious countries. They possessed
immense facilities for foreign trade, the greatest internal freedom of
motion for the industrial element, a legislature which took cognizance
of all the requirements of industry, in short both countries were, in
comparison with Germany, favored by certain circumstances which are
indispensably necessary to render industry flourishing and which were
then already fulfilled, whereas in Germany political division and
animosity and the pressure of the guilds operated most perniciously upon
industrial enterprise.

For these reasons industry could only develope itself in Germany later
and then but slowly. The transition from the old to the new state of
things appeared much more difficult, as many long since antiquated
forms, which had become endeared to us by use, had first to be
abolished.

The Saxon spirit, which, on the other side of the Channel had attained
to such glorious results, had to sustain many a conflict in its native
land, and many a praiseworthy attempt suffered shipwreck on the many
obstacles, which the splitting up of the nation and the retention of
unfeasable arrangements opposed to every great idea.

German science flourished at the same time to a very great extent, but
in its exaltation it stood too high above ordinary life, not perceiving
how to associate itself with it, so as to penetrate it with its
enlightening and warmthgiving rays. Thus German industry remained far
behind foreign enterprise and Germany beheld herself inundated with
quantities of foreign manufactures, which she herself could have
produced just as well, indeed it came to such a pass that foreigners
relying upon their well organised commerce and the celebrity of their
products even ventured to send German manufactures into the German
market, stamped with a foreign trademark.

German industry being at this low ebb, the manufacture of leadpencils
occupied but a very modest place. The first traces are to be found in
the village of _Stein_ not far from _Nürnberg_. As far back as the year
1726 the churchbooks mention marriages of “_Pencilmakers_”, subsequently
also “_Blacklead cutters_” male and female.

Leadpencil making however was then in its very lowest state, as in no
case is a large establishment mentioned, and it may be assumed that this
branch of trade was only just able to maintain a precarious position in
comparison with the English manufacture.

The Bavarian government however soon devoted their attention to this
branch of industry and sought to advance it. In the year 1766 a Count
von Kronsfeld received a concession for the erection of a leadpencil
manufactory at Jettenbach.

But the manufacture, wanting as it was in material, experience and
custom, still remained so insignificant, that in “Beckmanns
Technologie”, which appeared in the year 1777 “Pencilmaking” merely
received a quite superficial and incidental notice.

In the year 1816 the Bavarian government erected a Royal Leadpencil
manufactory at Obernzell (Hafnerzell) and introduced into this
establishment the French process already mentioned of using clay to
consolidate the blacklead.

When the new manufacture was in full play, the government transferred
the whole establishment into private hands as was intended from the
commencement, though the credit of having given the impetus to renewed
activity on a large scale certainly belongs to it.

The establishment is now in the possession of the renowned Regensburg
manufacturer. In addition to this the leadpencil manufacture had taken
root in Vienna and an establishment was formed there, in which likewise
the French process of mixing the blacklead with clay was adopted.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The now so extensive _leadpencil manufactory at Stein_ sprung from very
modest beginnings. In the year 1760 namely its founder, =Kaspar Faber=,
settled in this village of _Stein_ three miles from Nürnberg, and in the
year 1761 commenced the manufacture of leadpencils.

At that time adverse external circumstances pressed heavily upon the
young manufactory, the whole possessions of its founder consisting only
of a small house situated on the Rednitz and surrounded by a small
garden. A judicial inventory dated 1786 still preserved in the family
specifies faithfully the insignificant property possessed by them,
showing a nett result of “Fifty nine florins”.

The finest and dearest qualities mentioned therein are spoken of as
“several gross of _English_ pencils”, for thus the better German
manufactures had to disguise themselves under a foreign title. The
demand for these manufactures was trifling and purely local, as the
spirit of commerce and enterprise did but little to assist their
introduction.

Nürnberg and Fürth appear to have been the first to patronise the
products of the manufactory. To these places, as we know, the pencils
finished in the course of the week were carried on Saturdays in a
basket; but the fact of their having been well paid for goes to prove
that even then their excellence was acknowledged. The relations at that
time existing between the producer and the consuming public were however
but little regulated. The producer stood by himself alone, cut off from
the world, which seemed to him too immensely large for him to dare to
step out into it. The farsighted vision, searching in every direction to
discover new wants and invent new improvements, were wanting to him, as
was also the beneficial influence of external relations, with which he
was never brought in contact.

Nor was the consumer any more favorably situated.

The article became the object of extensive commercial speculation and
had often to travel a very long way before it reached the hands of the
consuming public, nor was the repute of a good name any guarantee to the
consumer of the excellence of the article, for in order to keep the
manufacturers in complete dependance, the merchants would not allow them
to mark their better products with their names, but prescribed them
foreign names and unmeaning signs, such as: Harps, Stars etc.

It was but slowly that the French process of mixing the lead with clay
gained ground and many years after the adoption of this process the
workmen, even in _Faber’s_ manufactory, were still employed in working
the Spanish lead in the old fashioned way by melting it and cutting it
with a saw.

The progress of the French however soon forced the merchants to press
the Nürnberg manufacturers to advance, so as not to be left behind by
competition. After the introduction of the new composition the Nürnberg
manufactories soon found themselves favorably circumstanced and yielded
satisfactory profits both to the merchants and the manufacturers.

But this was not to last. In the first ten years of this century
competition increased steadily and enormously so that demand by no means
kept pace with supply, and the vital question forced itself upon the
manufacturers, whether they were in a position to produce the article
either better or cheaper?

This difficult problem was however solved in a manner unfavorable to the
manufacture, and with that revolution commences the decay of the same
which now began to make itself felt.

The manufacture had, as before observed, become dependant upon the trade
of Nürnberg, which however no longer occupied its former high position,
for, although a considerable trade with foreign lands still existed, it
was to a great extent nominal. The enlargement and correction of ideas
by foreign travel and personal acquaintance with the grand advancement
in foreign industry, were wanting and thus no beneficial adjustment of
the Nürnberg manufacture could be brought about. Manufacture became the
shuttlecock of commercial speculation, which could not even so much as
claim the credit of having successfully met the increased requirements
of the age or put a stop to powerful competition or an overworked system
of trade more calculated for the future.

The trade of Nürnberg at that time lay in the fetters of the guild
system, the relic of an earlier golden time, which, aiming at the
isolation of industry, which was thereby given into its hands, was the
ban that opposed its progress for a length of time, alluring it to act
contrary to the interests of native industry and therefore contrary to
its own interests.

How much did this system leave of the ancient splendor and well earnt
renown of the City of Nürnberg?—A minimum kept and retained solely and
alone by the self denial, frugality and industry of the inhabitants. The
ingenious, serviceable articles had disappeared, giving place to goods,
whose only recommendation consisted in their being unprecedentedly
cheap. The endeavour to manufacture without the least regard to quality
or serviceability as long as cheapness was attained had become a rooted
evil increasing as it descended in all its fulness from father to son.
The honorable distinction of the title “Nuernberg, good” soon became
changed into the lasting and contemptuous one of “Nürnberg goods” and in
the business world people even went so far as to say that nothing good
could possibly be produced at Nürnberg.

These circumstances, which are to be laid to the account not only of
individuals but likewise of a domineering system and the spirit of a
time not so very far distant even now, attest that real industrial
activity must go hand in hand with mercantile spirit in order to
maintain itself in the world free from the influences above pointed out
and enter the lists with competition. It is only emancipated industry
that can congratulate itself on real progress and improve the article
only by having an eye to the requirements of the consumer.

It was under these circumstances that =Anton Wilhelm Faber=, the son of
the founder, whose name the firm still bears, and since 1810 =Georg
Leonhard Faber=, the father of the present proprietor, stood at the head
of the establishment.

Many improvements had been attempted and several adopted; much valuable
experience had been gained, many processes in the manufacture had been
perfected and a number of intelligent workmen drawn together; spite of
all this however the mercantile relations above described operated most
perniciously upon the manufactory.

The mode of manufacture induced by the enslavement of industry on the
part of trade more especially destroyed that conscientious strictness,
which must form the foundation of a solid industry. Things went so far
that articles were sent forth into the world, possessing the outward
appearance of pencils, the wood being just tipped with lead at each end
as though it was properly filled, whereas in fact you only had a useless
stick of wood before you.

Such swindling impositions, sent forth by the Nürnberg manufactories
into foreign countries, were well calculated to bring about a complete
collapse and it is difficult to regain confidence once deceived or
esteem once forfeited. But it must not be supposed that the interests of
the Nürnberg pencil manufacture were not solid. The unscrupulous
transactions on part of some establishments as a matter of course
damaged the reputation of those which carried on their business in an
industrious and conscientious manner and the renown of the whole trade
was thus placed in jeopardy.

In the year 1839 the present proprietor =Johann Lothar Faber= undertook
the management of the manufactory upon the death of his father _Georg
Leonhard Faber_ abovenamed.

This gentleman had, down to his nineteenth year, endeavoured as far as
possible to perfect his commercial education in Nuernberg in the most
fundamental and general manner and, from his earliest youth, especially
devoted himself to the study of everything at all bearing upon his
father’s manufactory. Even at that time he directed his attention not
merely to his father’s affairs, but also to the developement of a
business so sadly crippled and underwent many privations in order as
much is possible to satisfy the manifold claims laid upon him by the aim
which was always present to his imagination.

When nineteen years of age he went to Paris in order to increase his
stock of knowledge. There, in that capital of the World a greater range
of vision was opened to him and he beheld the operation of that restless
spirit of enterprise, which so mightily stirs the heart of the country.
For the first time the youth was brought face to face with the enormous
business carried on both with France and foreign lands and of which
Paris is the centre. He surveyed the fruits of a free, active industry,
the great highroads, upon which commerce flows from the mother country
to distant lands, the realisation of a colossal traffic, which allows no
article to escape its observation and flows in an ever moving wave
between purchasers and consumers. Then his thoughts were carried back to
his distant native land with its industry so cramped and fettered as to
be altogether estranged from the great markets of the world and the
possibility flashed across his mind, that matters might be rendered very
different at home and native industry not only reconquer its honour and
the renown of its pristine good name, but that it might also be led
forth from its narrow prison and enabled to compete with the vigour and
intelligence of the markets of the world and that it would thus ensure
obtaining an honourable position.

At that time industrial life was in full activity at Paris, scarcely six
years having elapsed since the revolution of July and Louis Philippe
being firmly established on the constitutional citizen-throne.

Thus great hopes filled the breast of the young man and impelled him to
follow up the ideas and plans of life he had adopted with all his
energy.

After a sojourn of three years in Paris there fell upon him suddenly and
unexpectedly, on the midst of his labours, the news of the death of his
father and after first performing a previously contemplated journey to
London, in order to enrich his store of knowledge and experience, he
returned to his native land in August 1839.

Now was the time to carry out and realise all the ideas he had imbibed.
The condition of his father’s manufactory was, as before stated,
extremely unsatisfactory. Scarcely twenty workmen were employed and the
annual business done amounted only to about 12000 florins. If that
glorious future, which the young man had assigned to the manufactory in
his imagination at Paris was to become a fact, it would involve carrying
on a conflict with all the old perverted notions, to break with the
cumbersome progress of former times and upon the ruins of the Nürnberg
trade, which beheld itself excluded from the world’s market, to lay the
foundations of a new commerce, which alone would be able to reconquer
for the venerable commercial city of Nürnberg her ancient renown.

He was the man, who brought, in the first place certainly only the
pencil manufacture, but therewith also native industry in general, into
direct contact with the ideas of foreign countries.

Sure and gradual progress was however indispensable. The new proprietor
adopted the device of:

                   “Truth, Respectability, Industry”

as the fundamental principle of his dealings, being firmly convinced,
that no human undertaking, which aspires to a future and lasting
success, can possibly exist, if it in any respect be based upon untruth,
or at variance with that, which passes for right and respectable among
men in general or, which ignores the duty of unwearying activity and
energetic industry. These principles seemed to him all the more
indispensable for his manufactory as he, by his position, rendered
himself to a certain extent responsible for the weal and woe of so many
souls.

The two brothers of the new proprietor had been destined by their father
for other modes of occupation, there being at that time no prospect of
the pencil manufacture maintaining them.

The present proprietor of the manufactory however, feeling confident of
the success of his comprehensive schemes, took to himself in the year
1840 his second youngest brother =Johann Faber=, who at that time
carried on an Hotel at Prague, in order to unite his activity with his
own.

The pencils were then only manufactured in proportionally few and cheap
sorts, but the new proprietor of the manufactory was soon induced to
introduce finer sorts at proportionate prices.

While still at Paris he had endeavoured in every way by letters to his
father to conduce towards the elevation of the manufactory and the
improvement of the quality of the articles manufactured, but it was when
he began to put his hands to the work himself that he first aimed at any
material success.

These improved manufactures and especially his new so called Polygrade
Pencils, which have met with the greatest renown especially among
artists, were all marked with the name of the firm and, as they by
reason of their increased price, the unavoidable consequence of improved
quality, met with but little countenance among the Nürnberg merchants,
the manufacturer travelled with them himself through Germany, Russia,
Austria, Belgium, Holland, France, England, Italy and Switzerland and
opened up business connexions with all the chief cities of Europe,
which, with the continued improvements in his manufactures, soon found
him a satisfactory custom and an ever increasing demand, important
enough to raise itself above the narrow sphere of local interests.

In the interior of the manufactory two great improvements were
undertaken, as nearly every year called for some new addition. In these
new erections care was taken to construct them as roomy and light as
possible, thus taking into consideration the health of the workmen and
the fact that work is much better performed in sunny spacious rooms,
than in gloomy dark vaults in which the air cannot be renewed, and that
the pleasure and zest with which it is performed redounds to the benefit
of the manufactory itself.

The countless departments of business, in which pencils are used, by
degrees rendered an extensive and systematic classification necessary
from the long easel-pencil to the smallest pocketbook-pencil.

The manufacture had, in consequence of its extensive foreign connexions,
already become considerably improved and extended and the varying
tastes, even the varying customs of the nations which used them, had to
be taken into consideration. The manufacturer never ceased to study all
wants, to subject his manufactures constantly to new trials, to avail
himself of fresh experiences in order to surpass with his products all
similar articles if possible.

The renown of his manufactures has penetrated to all parts of the world
and it is not merely their widely extended use, that attests their
excellence, but more especially the voice of those men, who make the
greatest demands upon the manufactory. There are few Architects and
Engineers who use any other article but _Faber’s pencils_, and the whole
profession of artists has long since proclaimed A. W. _Faber’s_ pencil
to be the very best for drawing purposes. Such men as _Cornelius_,
_Kaulbach_, _Bendemann_, _Lessing_, _Horace Vernet_ have expressed
themselves to this effect.

In accordance with this verdict is the result of the competition in the
several industrial Exhibitions, both at home and abroad, in which
_Faber’s_ pencils gained the victory all over all other manufactures of
the same nature.

With the year 1849 a new era in the activity of the manufactory
commenced. Ever since that year the products of the manufactory had met
with recognition and custom in America and with the continued increase
of the population it was to be assumed that the sale of the same would
also constantly increase in importance, especially as the manufacture of
leadpencils had not as yet taken firm root there and it therefore became
a question of obtaining a generally acknowledged product of European
manufacture, the excellence of which had been proved by the experience
of years and its honest manufacture.

This induced the proprietor of the manufactory to establish a house at
_New-York_ and entrust the management of the same to his youngest
brother =Eberhard Faber=, who had just completed his study for the law
at the universities of Berlin and Erlangen and was at that time engaged
in acquiring the necessary mercantile knowledge in the establishment at
Stein.

The trade with America thereby acquired a firm footing, the
communication spite of the great distance became more regular and the
connexion of the manufactory with the new world more close. As
_England_, _France_, _Russia_, _Italy_ and the East had long since been
open to _Faber’s_ manufactures, the idea of creating an universal trade
appeared to be realised.

As in the American commercial metropolis, so also in Paris a house was
founded, not merely to manage the important trade with France and the
neighbouring countries, but also to minister to the fine tastes and
elegant requirements of the French, which are of so much advantage to
any product intrinsically excellent.

In like manner, in order to supply the requirements of _England_,
_India_ and _Australia_, an agency was established in London in the year
1851 with M^{r.} _A. Heintzmann_, now _Heintzmann & Rochussen_, of N^o 9
Friday Street, City, E. C.

While thus the external relations of the manufactory continued steadily
to extend themselves, its internal developement likewise advanced step
by step.

On the very spot, where once the little house stood, the extensive
factory premises are now erected on either side of the Rednitz, the
water power of which river proving too insufficient and fluctuating,
steam had to be called into requisition and a large engine erected.

As already stated, almost each year demanded an addition to the premises
and considerable enlargements and alterations rendered necessary partly
by the constantly increasing business and partly by sanatory or
ornamental considerations, so that the very character of the locality
underwent considerable change.

Gardens now enclose the whole establishment on three of its sides. In
one of them stands the residence of the proprietor of the manufactory,
_Lothar_, visible from afar by reason of the height of its situation and
remarkable on account of the peculiarity of the style of its
architecture; in the other the house of his younger brother, _Johann_,
so that everything stands together in the closest connexion like the
life of a large family.

The proprietor, while endeavouring in every way to advance all the ends
of the manufactory in the most perfect manner, has not omitted to bear
in mind at the same time the moral and material welfare of his workmen,
whom he has accustomed himself to recognise as men and his fellow
creatures.

In their interest there were in the first place factory rules drawn up,
which regulated the duties and rights of the individual in the most
precise manner and especially took cognisance of the moral conduct of
the workman. They also gave the most diligent workmen and such as were
more advanced in years, opportunities of increasing their income by
ensuring them an increase of pay under certain conditions.

In order to awaken and encourage a spirit of frugality in the men and to
render their future more comfortable and independant, a Workman’s
Savings _Bank_ was instituted, with the following fundamental
principles: Acceptance of the smallest deposit at any time; interest at
four per cent to commence as soon as the deposit reaches the amount of
five florins; deposits to be withdrawn only on account of some
notoriously pressing necessity. This institution found immediate
recognition and by degrees came into almost general favor, so that now
many an individual, who formerly had to battle with economical cares,
finds himself in the possession of a little property and rejoices in his
wellregulated family affairs.

There is likewise a special fund for sickness.

A library has also been founded by the master of the manufactory,
accessible both to the workman and his family and well used by them, at
the same time too an infant school was started for the children of the
work people. He likewise originated and supported with his own means the
erection of a new schoolhouse, and embraced every opportunity of
advancing the education therein.

The social life of the workmen was also taken into consideration and the
taste for more elevating amusements, invigorating alike to soul and
body, encouraged. Of an evening they would meet in two singing societies
to indulge in the good German song, or on Sundays they would amuse
themselves with the crossbow in the free, fresh air of God’s Nature in
the neighbouring forest, or again on festive occasions they would all
meet together like one large united family for a sociable convivial
repast.

Finally, care was also taken that the workman should mix with the world
outside the factory, for which purpose a number of them were sent by the
master of the factory to the Industrial Exhibition at Munich in order
that they might themselves see the fruit of their labour publicly
exposed to view and honorably mentioned, and at the same time obtain a
glimpse of other branches of industry.

Further, in order to provide new dwellings for the workmen a large
building was erected, of pleasing external proportions, and other
buildings were converted into workmen’s dwellings. The houses themselves
contain separate apartments, which afford the families at a low rent a
much pleasanter abode than could be obtained in most of the houses in
the towns. Nor is there any constraint; the houses are open to any body
and the domestic regulations introduced in the interests of the
community are of that nature, that they are cheerfully complied with by
everyone. Thus there reigns in these premises a spirit of order and
contentment, which alone can make life agreeable.

The village of _Stein_ did not formerly possess any church. For years
all exertions to found a separate parish there remained fruitless, until
at last the year 1861 brought their reward and in that year, in which
the manufactory celebrated its hundredth anniversary, the peaceful clang
of the bells for the first time invited the faithful to divine service
in the newly erected church, the cost of which had been defrayed by the
master of the factory entirely from his own means, out of concern for
the spiritual welfare of his workpeople and attachment to his own native
place.

The formerly neglected little village has assumed quite a different
appearance since then. From afar the slender gothic steeple of the
church may be seen rearing its pinnacle proudly aloft, while the smoke
of the surrounding shafts tell of busy industry and labour. The former
picture of want has given place to a certain degree of wealth and the
little garden of the humble house been converted into two large parks.

Simultaneously however with this prosperity in general the manufactory
had of course to experience some unpleasant incidents and obstinate
struggles. The universal demand for _Faber’s_ manufactures was not slow
in inducing other manufacturers to imitate and pirate the trademark of
the manufactory, which is to be found on all articles manufactured
there, and thus to pass off upon the public spurious goods possessing
nothing more than the external similarity to the genuine articles, and
which could scarcely aspire to mediocrity, which frauds were often
repeated, coming to light in various countries.

The manufacturing firm of Rubenstein at Moscow adopted the plan of
making use of _Faber’s_ trademark and wrappers for their own
manufactures and then to circulate them in the Russian market. These
malpractises were carried on for a length of time in spite of every
exertion to put a stop to them and the prohibition which the Russian
Governement issued against the firm in question. Manufactures with
spurious trademarks were constantly turning up in Russia until King
_Maximilian_ of Bavaria during his protracted stay at Nürnberg in the
year 1855 suppressed the evil. His lively interest for reviving industry
had already induced him to decorate the proprietor of the manufactory
with the order of merit of St. Michael, firstclass, in the year 1854, on
which occasion he likewise honoured the factory at _Stein_ with a visit
and made himself acquainted with all the details of its operations from
the mouth of the manager of the factory, and as at that time these
malpractises were brought before his notice he gave the matter all his
attention and promised some assistance.

Nor had we to wait long for this, for shortly afterwards _Lothar Faber_
received a communication from the State ministry of the Royal House and
Foreign affairs, stating, that, by the intervention of the Royal
Bavarian Embassy at St. Petersburg, the evil had been put a stop to by
the Russian Government; all the articles marked with _Faber’s_ trademark
together with the stamp destroyed, and the manager of the Russian
manufactory compelled to give assurance in writing that he would no
longer pirate _Faber’s_ trademark, in default rendering himself liable
to legal penalties.

In New-York similar frauds were also carried on. Pencils manufactured in
Nürnberg with _Faber’s_ trademark and in precise imitations of his
wrappers were imported and sold by the firm of Winterhoff, Piper &
C^{o.}. Complaint having been made, the Customhouse at New-York, at the
instance of the examiner appointed for the department of “Literature,
Writingmaterials and fine Arts”, detained one case of these spurious
articles, whereupon the courts of law prohibited all further sale in the
town and county of New-York.

A still more cunning fraud was perpetrated at Nürnberg. A deaf and dumb
lithographer by name Georg Wolfgang Faber was put forward, whose name
was to be made use of. The similarity of the surname and wrapper exactly
copied from those of _Faber’s_ manufactory were sufficient to make the
public believe that they really had the genuine article from _Faber’s_
manufactory before them. On the intervention of the authorities, whom
_Lothar Faber_ put in motion, the reputed manufacturer was subjected to
an examination, which proved him to be altogether incapable of producing
such a thing as a serviceable article and shewed that he had only lent
his name to other speculators, whereupon the Royal Government of middle
Franconia withdrew the licence for pencil making from the said G. W.
Faber.

Proceedings were likewise taken against a Pencilmanufacturer at Fulda,
who had manufactured and circulated upwards of seven thousand dozen
leadpencils with the false stamp “A. W. Faber”. The Criminal Court of
the Electorate of Hesse in a decision dated 2^{nd} September 1856,
condemned the defendant, on account of fraud, to a pecuniary fine of 50
Thalers and further to four weeks imprisonment, a decision, which the
supreme Court of Appeal at Cassel absolutely confirmed. Similar events
took place in other countries with like results.

As the proprietor of the factory has hitherto proceeded against many
persons at home and abroad who had attempted to manufacture and sell
pencils in imitation of those of his firm he will further use all his
efforts to suppress every deception foisted upon the public.

In the meanwhile the manufactory assiduously endeavoured to attain to
perfection in its products. As the stock of blacklead began to disappear
in the mines of Cumberland, it succeeded, by its perfected manipulation
of the material, in producing so many grades of hardness and supplying
such an extensive variety of pencil, that no demand could present itself
without meeting with satisfaction among the great choice of
manufactures.

In the opinion of connoisseurs the finest sorts even surpass the best
Cumberland leadpencils in their lasting and uniform degrees of hardness,
their greater firmness and durability as also in the increased purity of
the lead. In addition to this they possess such an amount of softness
and delicacy, as to be able to stand comparison in this and every
particular with the Cumberland pencils. Besides this, and in addition to
several other improvements relating to their external appearance, the
most useful and ornamental shapes for pencils of the finer descriptions
were devised and introduced, and still more recently the socalled
“_Artist’s pencils_” were added to the list of novelties and immediately
met with the most universal recognition, which soon stimulated other
manufacturers to attempt imitations.

In the midst of these exertions the news was suddenly received, that
that, which the English had so long sought for and which the perfected
system of manufacture still stood much in need of in order to yield more
than was previously possible, had been found. A new blacklead mine had
been discovered. _Johann Peter Alibert_, merchant of the first class at
Tabasthus in Siberia, had undertaken an exploring expedition in the
mountainous eastern portion of Siberia, partly to search for gold. He
examined the sand of the rivers Oka, Belloi, Kitoi and Irkutsk, and in
one of the mountain ravines in the vicinity of Irkutsk lighted
accidentally upon specimens of pure blacklead. _Alibert_ immediately
recognised the value and importance of the material and instituted
strict investigations until in the year 1847 after much labor and
exertion he arrived at the conviction that, in a branch of the mountain
range of Saian among the heights of the Batougol mountains four hundred
versts westward of the town of Irkutsk, close to the frontier of China,
a primitive deposit of blacklead must exist. He addressed himself at
once to the task of opening a mine in order to bring the costly material
to the surface.

At first the blacklead met with proved to be no better than the refuse
Cumberland blacklead, and upwards of three hundred tons of this quality
had to be removed before a deposit of the best and purest blacklead was
finally opened up. Pieces were soon obtained weighing as much as eighty
pounds. The Academy of Sciences at St. Petersburg, before which body
_Alibert_ laid his samples of blacklead for analysis, declared the same
to consist of the same elements and possess the same properties and
consequently to be of precisely the same nature as the Cumberland
blacklead. _Alibert_ now proceeded to England where he visited the
declining blacklead mines of Cumberland and convinced himself by
personal observation of the exhaustion and decay of the same. He
thereupon submitted his samples of blacklead to some of the most
extensive English leadpencil manufactories for examination, who
unanimously confirmed the verdict of the Academy at St. Petersburg,
pronouncing the quality of the Siberian blacklead to be excellent and in
no way inferior to the Cumberland lead.

It had cost _Alibert_ eight years of unremitting labour and a capital of
one million Francs when he beheld his enterprise crowned with this
certainly unexpected success.

He now turned his attention to rendering the newly discovered material
available for the manufacture of pencils. Having convinced himself that
_Faber’s_ manufactory was the most extensive in existence and that it
circulated the largest amount of fine goods in the world, he applied to
the same with a proposition for an agreement, by virtue of which his
blacklead was to be taken solely and exclusively by that establishment
for the manufacture of pencils.

The firm on the other hand, having thoroughly convinced themselves that
the newly discovered blacklead was quite equal to the genuine and best
Cumberland blacklead in quality, willingly entertained this proposition
of _Alibert’s_, so that in the year 1856 a contract was entered into
between the manufactory and _Alibert_ and sanctioned by the Russian
Government, according to which all the blacklead, which comes from the
Siberian mines is to be delivered to _A. W. Faber’s_ manufactory, and to
no other establishment for the purposes of pencil manufacture, now and
for all time.

It was a mighty work which the restless energy of _Alibert_ had brought
into execution in a land so difficult of access. On the summit of the
mountain of Batougol, which now in the Russian maps of the country is
designated by the name of “_Alibertsberg_” in honorable remembrance of
the discoverer of the blacklead mine, _Alibert_ assembled all his
working force and a little colony soon sprung up, which addressed itself
zealously to the new mining operations.

The miners brought the blacklead to the surface in large blocks and the
material thus obtained proclaimed at once, by its external purity and a
beautiful silvery lustre, its excellent value and composition. The
transport was attended with immense difficulties. The blocks of
blacklead, carefully packed in wooden cases, had to traverse enormous
tracts of country, across which not the least vestige of a road is to be
found, upon the backs of reindeer to reach the nearest seaport, whence
they were shipped to Europe, while other consignments of the blacklead
were forwarded to the manufactory exclusively by land.

It may be conceived that _Alibert_ by this discovery drew even the
attention of the Russian Government upon himself and was gratified by
the kindest encouragement both on part of the Czar and the Governor of
the province of Irkutsk, Count _Murawiew Amursky_. In the report
concerning explorations in Siberia issued by the imperial Academy of
Sciences the discoverer is mentioned particularly (page 33) and at the
same time _Faber’s_ manufactory, the capital of which has facilitated
and advanced this enterprise, is honorably spoken of.

The manufactory, thus in possession of so extensive a store of
blacklead, the excellence of which both theory and practice place on a
level with the Borrowdale lead, has produced pencils made with the
Siberian lead ever since the year 1856. It was now no longer a question
of attaining to the standard of the Cumberland pencils but rather of
surpassing it.

The new material was worked partly in a natural state so as to enable
connoisseurs to convince themselves of its excellent quality and partly
artificially manufactured, which yielded as a result such a degree of
evenness, purity and unchanging hardness as had never before been
obtained, not even in the best Cumberland pencils. After the exertions
of six years the manufactory is just now intending to enter the World’s
market with its new productions.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Before we conclude our sketch we must stop to contemplate a bright spot
in the internal history of the factory and remember the day on which it
celebrated the completion of the hundredth year of its existence with a
festival, to which the joyful feelings of a happy and contented
population and the not less hearty than general participation therein
from far and near, lent a peculiar solemnity.

The festival was celebrated by the proprietor of the manufactory =Johann
Lothar Faber= and his brother =Johann Faber= together with their
families and in the midst of the assembled factory hands male and
female, as also of all masterworkmen employed for the manufactory and a
large number of invited guests.

The 16^{th} September 1861 was the day fixed for the occasion, chiefly
with the view of rendering the festival all the more impressive by a
special celebration of divine service in the new church of the village,
which had only been consecrated a fortnight before. Preparations of the
most varied character occupied both the masters of the factory and their
families for some time previously, in order to render this auspicious
and happy event a thoroughly joyous festival for their workpeople and
all that participated therein, and the remembrance of it no less
pleasing than indelible.

Similar feelings however also actuated the workpeople, who exerted
themselves with all their power to add to the splendor of the festival,
and manifest their good feelings and gratitude in a touching and
unexpected manner.

On the eve of the festive day the workmen in a body brought their master
a torchlight procession, which, after passing through the whole of the
gaily decorated premises, came to halt in the courtyard of Mr. _Faber’s_
house, whereupon the workmen’s singing club performed three partsongs
composed expressly for the occasion.

A deputation of workmen consisting of men who had been longest in the
factory then handed the master, together with an appropriate address
made by their senior member, a handsome and tasteful album as a festive
present from them, and a parchment roll on which were printed a
dedication composed in verse, then the speech which a workman made in
the most spirited manner previous to the presentation of the album,
further the songs performed and a list of the names of all the workmen
and women. This was certainly one of the most affecting moments and even
those men, who had become grey in the service of the factory were unable
to restrain their tears of emotion and gratitude.

_Lothar Faber_ in his reply dwelt particularly upon how he valued the
proofs of love, attachment, gratitude and faithfulness shown to him as
being not merely intended for himself alone but likewise for his whole
house and more especially for his two brothers standing so faithfully by
his side, and how he wished that these sentiments of the workpeople
might ever spread among them and be manifested to him and his family for
all time.

On the morning of the sixteenth of September all the workmen and women
assembled at the house of _L. Faber_ in order to receive the festive
present appointed for each person as also a commemoration medal coined
expressly for this festival, having on the one side the arms of the
family with the legend: “Founder: _Kaspar Faber_ † 1784; Successors: _A.
W. Faber_ † 1819; _G. L. Faber_ † 1839; _J. L. Faber_”; and upon the
Obverse the legend: “In remembrance of the Century Jubilee of the
Leadpencil Manufactory of _A. W. Faber_ at Stein near Nürnberg.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

The festive clang of bells now summoned all present to the special
divine service, which was destined to form a worthy commencement to the
festival and all the factory hands arranged themselves in a stately
procession, which, headed by the members of the _Faber_ family, moved
towards the church in order there to give vent to the feelings of
gratitude in a pious and christian manner. A sermon was preached, the
text being taken from the 90^{th} Psalm, verses 16. 17 and at the
conclusion of the service all the workpeople male and female assembled
at eleven o’clock at the workmen’s dwellinghouses in the village of
Stein built by _L. Faber_, from whence they started in a procession,
headed by the band of the fourteenth regiment of infantry stationed at
Nürnberg, for the park of _L. Faber_, one portion of which nearest the
dwellinghouse had been specially arranged for the festival partly for
the entertainment of the numerous guests and partly for various
amusements of play and dance, and which, by its elegant decorations and
appropriate mottoes, bearing upon the past and present of the Factory,
made the most agreeable impression upon every one. Arrived upon the
festive grounds the entire body of workpeople about four hundred in
number partook of the dinner provided for them, the regimental band
performing agreeable music the while. The repast concluded, _L. Faber_
mounted a tribune especially erected for this occasion and ornamented
with lifesize busts of the departed ancestors, and in a short speech set
before them the chief features of the history of the manufactory,
impressing upon them, on the commencement of the second century of its
existence, the value of that order and carefulness which are so
indispensably necessary for the prosperous career of a large
establishment in the requirements of our age, and concluding with a
cheer for the existence and welfare of the Factory in which all joined
vociferously.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The two youngest boys of the family, _Wilhelm_ the son of _L. Faber_ ten
years and _Ernst_ the son of his brother _Johann_, seven years of age
hereupon ascended the steps and while the former greeted his father with
a poem in the name of the four surviving brothers and sisters of _L.
Faber_, the latter presented him with a silver goblet also in their name
as a souvenir of the festival.

                  *       *       *       *       *

By three o’clock the number of the guests had increased to nearly six
hundred. They amused themselves with all sorts of games, to which the
drawing of prizes lent an especial charm, and with dancing round the
lofty maypole erected on the grass plot, or with wandering through the
park, which was entirely thrown open, while the band charmed the ear
with its performances. In the midst of this lively scene of rejoicing,
which partook of the appearance of a national gathering, the Master of
the Factory _L. Faber_, together with all others present were surprised
in the most agreeable manner by the arrival of a gracious autographic
missive from _His Majesty_ the King, which read as follows:


    “On the 16^{th} inst. you celebrate, as I am given to understand the
    completion of the first Century of the existence of the manufactory
    founded by your ancestors and whose well earnt fame both at home and
    abroad redounds to the honor of Bavarian industry. It has likewise
    given me special pleasure to observe the care, with which you watch
    over the moral and temporal affairs of your workpeople. The festival
    which you are about to keep, affords me an opportunity of offering
    my best congratulations to you and the establishment conducted by
    you with so much success and at the same time of expressing the hope
    that the manufactory will be blest with continued prosperity.

          With the sincerest good wishes

    Hohenschwangau 14. September 1861.

                                                  Your affectionate King
                                                        =Max.=

    To
    Mr. _Johann Lothar Faber_ Manufacturer.”


With joyous emotion _L. Faber_ communicated this gracious mark of honour
to all assembled, by reading it aloud from the tribune, concluding with
a triple cheer for His Majesty King _Max_ in which every one joined with
the greatest spirit.

He then gave the health of his two brothers, who so faithfully and
energetically seconded his exertions, which was received with joyous
acclamations echoing again and again from the vast assembly; then his
fellowworkers for the manufactory outside its pale, as also all his
business friends and especially the artists, who, by patronising his
manufactures and appreciating their value for art had so materially
contributed to the extension of his fame. _L. Faber_ thereupon recited a
poem the fundamental idea of which was the motto of the manufactory:

                   “Truth, Respectability, Industry.”

This recital served as an introduction to the unveiling of an
allegorical tableau executed by _Maar_ of Nürnberg representing partly
the activity of the Factory, and mercantile enterprise, and partly an
appropriate allusion to the Jubilee festival. Then a short address
followed by the presentation of a congratulatory testimonial to _L.
Faber_ on part of the authorities of the council of trade of Nürnberg
was made, which elicited a cheer for the same. Then _Maar_ the artist
made a speech upon the history of the lead pencil and its application to
Art, thanking _L. Faber_ in the name of his colleagues for the cheer
given them and concluding with a toast for the establishment.

A small brochure setting forth the contents of the Festival Album before
mentioned and containing a capital piece of poetry composed by a
relation of the _Faber_ family was then distributed among the guests.

A number of speeches and toasts were now made and given by the workmen
themselves, who were fairly carried away by excitement, which one and
all breathed a spirit of attachment and gratitude, and of which not a
few, spite of their simple character, caused feelings of emotion.
Performances of their singing clubs alternated with those of the band
until as darkness drew near the illumination of the festive grounds and
an extensive portion of the park presented a fresh tableau. Bengal
lights illumined several of the more lovely points and a pyrotechnic
display brought the festival to a conclusion at nine o’clock, when all
the participators departed in the gayest spirits and with hearty wishes
for the continued prosperity of the Manufactory.

The foregoing description of the Jubilee festival of _A. W. Faber’s_
Pencil manufactory may be appropriately closed with the mention off a
transaction which was no less a gratification than an honor to the
proprietor of the same:

On the morning of the eighth of October a deputation of the magistracy
and representatives of the Commune of Nürnberg, consisting of the two
Burgomasters, _von Wächter_ and _Seiler_ and the President of the
College of the Commune, Dr. _Lindner_, proceeded to Stein in order to
present _Johann Lothar Faber_ with the diploma of honorary citizenship
of the City of Nürnberg, which reads as follows:


    “The Magistrate and representatives of the Commune of the Royal
    Bavarian city of Nürnberg have conferred upon Mr. _Johann Lothar
    Faber_, proprietor of the Pencil manufactory at Stein in the Royal
    Jurisdiction of Nürnberg, in appreciation of the many and important
    services, which he has rendered to industry in general and the trade
    of Nürnberg in particular, by an unanimous resolution the honorary
    citizenship of the city of Nürnberg, and, after obtaining the most
    gracious consent of His Majesty the King, caused this deed to be
    drawn up for him. Given under the great seal of the city and the
    signatures of the two Burgomasters as also that of the President of
    the College of the Commune.

          Nürnberg the 16^{th} September 1861.

                       _von Wächter_, I. Burgomaster.
                         _Seiler_, II. Burgomaster.
         _Lindner_, President of the Presentatives of the Commune.”

                           ------------------




The celebration of the hundreth anniversary of the existence of the
Factory afforded the proprietor of the same a welcome opportunity of
dedicating this memoir to all his honoured business friends and patrons
as a token of his gratitude and esteem and at the same time of giving
them a pretty perfect sketch of his Factory and a view of its internal
arrangement. With this latter object he had the nine views, attached to
the end hereof, taken, which represent a faithful sketch of the chief
points of the establishment and by means of which it is possible to form
a tolerably accurate idea of the Lead pencil Manufacture.

The _first plate_ represents the sluicing process. On the left hand side
of the picture the blacklead is seen in its original casks, on the right
hand side the clay. These two raw materials are here washed and then
passed on in pans to be dried.

The _second plate_ shows the grinding which goes on day and night, the
composition of blacklead, clay &c. being ground fine while in a wet
state, and then dried in ovens especially adapted for that purpose.

The _third plate_ depicts the preparation of the lead. The workmen to
the left in the background are forming a plastic mass of the composition
by wetting it with water, which while still wet is passed into the
cylinder of the press where it is forced through a copper plate, at the
bottom of the cylinder, in the centre of which there is an opening of a
peculiar shape. As is seen in the representation the lead thus pressed
through the cylinder assumes the shape of a ring and is then carried by
the workmen on the right upon boards and lying in a straight position,
to a moderately warm place to dry. Before however the lead is completely
dry, it is cut into sticks of the proper length for filling the pencils.
After the drying comes the annealing in peculiarly constructed ovens.
This process takes place in hermetically closed vessels of clay or iron
in which the sticks of lead are placed in a horizontal position.

In the _fourth plate_ the method of cutting, sawing and planing the wood
is seen. In the foreground to the right lies a balk of Florida Cedar
wood. These balks are from 10 to 15 feet in length and 8 to 24 inches in
thickness. They are first cut across with an upright saw in pieces of
the length of a pencil, which pieces are then cut into sticks by small
circular saws as shown on the right hand side of the view, the sticks
being thereupon planed smooth by the machine in front. Behind the
planing machine the grooving machines are situated by means of which the
smoothly planed sticks are cut with fine circular saws into top and
bottom pieces, the latter of which are furnished with grooves.

The _fifth plate_ represents the process of glueing the sticks of lead
into the wood. At each glueing table there are three workmen, one of
whom smears the two pieces of wood with glue, while the second places
the lead in the groove and the third, after the two pieces are fixed
together, trims the pencils, which are then placed in a press and firmly
pressed together by means of screws. The round bundles seen in this view
are partly finished pencils and partly tops and bottoms.

At this stage of the manufacture the pencils are all square and are now
passed on to the planing shop represented in the _sixth plate_. There
they are cut to the exact length by means of fine circular saws and then
planed round or square, oval or even hexagonal or trigonal by the
planing machines, which they reach in a square form.

The seventh and eighth plates show those operations which are carried on
by females.

In the _seventh plate_ to the right the workwomen are seen engaged in
polishing the pencils with colours, and to the left those who by means
of a lever press stamp the name of the firm upon them.

At last the polished and stamped pencils arrive at the room, where they
are made up into packets as represented in the _eighth_ plate. Here they
are fastened up in dozens, covered with tickets and packed either by the
dozen or the gross.

The _ninth plate_ represents the dwelling houses and manufacturing
Premises. The residence on an elevation to the left is that of the
proprietor of the Manufactory, below which is seen that of his brother.
The two houses in the middle were dwellinghouses in former times and
have been used for years as Countinghouse, Warehouse and
Sample-show-room. The workshops lower down on the right stand close to
the river Rednitz and the machinery therein is set in motion by
waterpower, whereas in the other premises higher up steam is the agent
employed.




[Illustration:

  Schlemmen.
  Atelier de la purification du graphite.
  Sluicing the lead.]




[Illustration:

  Mahlen.
  Moulins à moudre le graphite.
  Grinding the lead.]




[Illustration:

  Bearbeitung des Bleies.
  Atelier de la manipulation de la mine.
  Grinding the lead.]




[Illustration:

  Sägen und Hobeln des Holzes.
  Atelier du sciage et rabotage du bois.
  Sawing and planing process.]




[Illustration:

  Einleimen des Bleies.
  Atelier du collage de la mine dans le bois.
  Gluing room.]




[Illustration:

  Hobeln der Bleistifte.
  Atelier du rabotage des crayons.
  Planing room.]




[Illustration:

  Poliren und Zeichnen.
  Atelier de vernisage et numérotage.
  Polishing and stamping process.]




[Illustration:

  Binden und Verpacken.
  Atelier de l’empaquetage des crayons.
  Tying and packing room.]




[Illustration:

  Fabrik in Stein bei Nürnberg.
  Fabrique de Crayons.
  Pencil-Manufactory.]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                           TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE


Punctuation has been normalized. Variations in hyphenation have been
retained as they were in the original publication. The author’s original
choice of spelling and variations therein have been maintained with the
exception of the following:

          too —> two great improvements {page 13}
          loftly —> dancing round the lofty maypole {page 26}
          second —> seconded his exertions {page 27}

The following attribution line, which appeared in the illustration
captions in the original publication, has not been included in the
captions in this ebook:

   Lor. Ritter del.      Druckerei von C. Kruthoffer, Frankfurt a. M.

The original version of this book used spaced text, most frequently for
proper and place names. The spaced text has been represented using
_underscores_ in the plain text version of the book.

Bolded phrases are presented by surrounding the text with =equal signs=
herein.

The caret symbol ^ precedes characters that were raised as a
superscript in the original book. In the case where more than one
character was raised, those characters were encased in brackets, as in
this example: 2^{nd}





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Lead Pencil Manufactory of A. W.
Faber at Stein near Nürnberg, Bavar, by A. W. Faber

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LEAD PENCIL MANUFACTORY ***

***** This file should be named 52256-0.txt or 52256-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/2/2/5/52256/

Produced by deaurider, Carolyn Jablonski and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

